---
layout:     post
title:      "An Alternative Theory of Causation"
date:       2019-10-15 00:00:00 +0000
categories: philosophy metaphysics
---

An Alternative Theory of Causation

	Human reasoning about the everyday world relies heavily upon an intuitive notion of cause and effect. A classroom window is broken and the teacher immediately looks outside for a bat-wielding child with a guilty look. A violin virtuoso at his Carnegie Hall debut cites his instructor’s intransigence as the reason for his success. An engineer reviews her physics textbook one final time before launch and double-checks that the rocket nozzle is pointed downwards. We understand at a fundamental level that certain events happen because of other ones: that the child’s ball broke the window, that the virtuoso’s skill resulted from practice, that the explosive hot gas rushing downwards will propel the rocket away from the earth. Yet while we have no trouble identifying examples, pinning down the exact phenomenon we refer to by the term “causation” proves quite difficult. One cannot simply point to it.
	Initial attempts equated causation with correlation: for A-type events to cause B-type events is simply for A-type events to be reliably correlated with B-type events. Leaving aside the difficulty of defining “reliably”, this definition has two major explanatory weaknesses. The first, termed by David Lewis the “problem of effects”, is that it fails to differentiate between causes and effects. If an effect usually has the same cause, that cause will correlate with that effect just as strongly as that effect will correlate with that cause, rendering cause and effect indifferentiable. The second Lewis terms the “problem of epiphenomena”: two effects of the same cause will often be highly correlated. A mild cough and frequent sneezing commonly co-occur, but both are caused by the common cold; they do not cause each other. Taken together, these two issues mean that correlation-causation fails to match our intuition when classifying many everyday occurrences.
Moreover, and more importantly, correlation-causation just doesn’t seem to get at what we want. Our intuitive notion of causation involves a distinct interaction between cause and effect that mere correlation does not. The window breaks because it is hit by the ball. Broken windows and balls don’t just “happen together” coincidentally, and a broken window and a flying ball co-occurring are not necessarily causally related. We intuitively differentiate between the case when the ball broke the window and the case when a broken window and a ball merely occurred at the same place.
Lewis instead attempts to reduce causation to the truth of counterfactuals. According to his theorization, for an event A to cause another event B is for it to be true that A counterfactually leads to B and not-A counterfactually leads to not-B. The ball hitting the window led to the window breaking; if the ball had not hit the window the window would not have broken. The first counterfactual is trivially true as the ball did in fact hit the window and the window did in fact break. The second requires per Lewis that in a majority of the closest possible worlds where event A did not happen event B did not either. In the closest possible worlds where the ball did not hit the window the window would presumably still be intact. Counterfactual-causation closely aligns with our use of language: we say that the window broke “because” the ball hit it and that the window “wouldn’t” have broken if the ball “hadn’t” hit it.
Counterfactual-causation resolves both of the major issues with correlation-causation. Causes and effects are differentiable: if event A causes event B, the second counterfactual does not hold if A and B are swapped. If the fire hadn’t occurred, there would have been no smoke, but if there had been no smoke there still could have been a fire. Epiphenomena are not mistakenly classified as causally related: if event A causes event B and event C, not-B does not counterfactually lead to not-C; Lewis’s second counterfactual fails to hold. The cold caused both the sneeze and the cough; the cough could have occurred without the sneeze. Lewis constructs the similarity relation across possible worlds as to make his theory’s classifications of event pairs match those of our intuition; in the closest possible world where the cough did not occur, the sneeze still did.
Counterfactual-causation is less clearly aligned with our intuition in two more intricate classes of cases. The first is pre-emption: event A “would have caused” event C, but event B happened first and caused it instead. The ball thrown by Suzy would have broken the window, but Billy’s later throw was faster and broke it instead. Lewis’s theory, however, seems to classify neither event A or event B as a cause of event C; the second counterfactual does not hold. In the majority of closest possible worlds where event B did not happen, event C would still have happened because event A did; in the majority of closest possible worlds where event A did not happen, event C would still have happened because event B did. If Billy hadn’t thrown his ball, the window would have been broken by Suzy’s; if Suzy hadn’t thrown her ball, the window would have been broken by Billy’s.
The second problem faced by counterfactual-causation is generally termed causation-by-omission. We routinely speak as if certain events not happening cause other events to happen: Bobby’s failure to water Jill’s flowers caused them to die, Billy’s failure to turn in his philosophy paper on time caused him to fail the class. There are two separate issues here. First, when we speak of an omission, we are not speaking of something happening. “Bobby not watering Jill’s flowers” never happened; the phrase has no referent event between which and the flowers’ death the causal relation could obtain. One can identify the omission with a positive event that happened instead, but that seems to mismatch intuition as the positive event is only relevant in virtue of the fact that it was equivalent with the omission. The skiing trip Bobby went on could well have been an ocean cruise; all that matters is that it meant he wasn’t watering the flowers. Second, Lewis’s theory classifies many omissions as causes that we are unlikely to label as such. If we allow omissions to count as events, we have no reason to preference one omission over another: the Dalai Lama’s failure to water Jill’s flowers caused them to die just as much as Billy’s failure to water them did, yet Suzy might well reprimand Billy but won’t even think about the Dalai Lama.
In general, given the complexity of causation and the various difficulties the current solutions have in explaining it, it seems to me that we have not yet satisfactorily explored various high-level conceptual possibilities for what exactly causation “is”. In particular, both correlation-causation and counterfactual-causation take for granted that the relata of the causal relation are discrete, identifiable, point-in-spacetime events. I am not convinced that this is justified. When we speak of one thing causing another, we often describe the two occurrences in quite general terms. “The ball hitting the window caused the window to break” refers to both involved events by descriptions that do not specify many of the particular features of each. The ball could have hit at a wide variety of angles; the window could have broken into various different shapes and sizes of glass fragments. Of course, the ball did in fact hit at a certain angle and the window did in fact break in a certain way. But we do not hypothesize many subtly different causal relations between highly-specified ball collisions and highly-specified window-breakings and refer to a different particular one in each occurrence. Rather, we hypothesize one approximate relation and consider many particular occurrences to be instantiating it: two balls hitting two windows do not both break their associated windows in virtue of two distinct particular causal relations; they both break their windows in virtue of being large solid masses impacting a fragile surface at high velocity.

So inspired, in this paper I set out to lay basic groundwork for a theory of causation in which the relata of the causal relation are not events but instead world-state-predicates. I propose that statements such as “A caused B” are claims that (a) the statement “forall x . A x at t_0 ⇒ B x at t_1 and not-A x at t_0 ⇒ not-B x at t_1”, with w being a world which has a unique state at t_i and t_j, A and B being predicates over world states (occupying the same positions in the predicate-causal relation as events occupy in counterfactual-causation), and t_i and t_j being not necessarily subsequent points in time, is true, and (b) A x at t_0; the world did in fact satisfy predicate A at t_0 (“the ball did in fact hit the window”), so therefore (c) B x at t_1, the world did therefore in fact satisfy predicate B at t_1 (“the window did in fact break”).
Before further clarification, let me describe my strategy. Structurally, I want to reduce causation: explain our intuitions and discussions of a phenomenon we term “causation” and rephrase causal statements in a form requiring no “causal arrow” or other causation-related primitive. I will first lay out the framework of the theory (“predicate-causation”) and describe how it explains our intuitions and allows us to rephrase causal statements. Case-wise, I will start by addressing everyday causal relations which both correlation-causation and counterfactual-causation get right. I will then analyze the two major problems faced by correlation-causation — the “problem of effects” and “problem of epiphenomena” as termed by Lewis — and describe how I think predicate-causation resolves them. I will do the same for the two primary difficulties of counterfactual-causation — preemption and causation by omission — and argue that predicate-causation can explain them in a way that counterfactual-causation cannot. I conclude by attempting to anticipate a few counterarguments and discussing potential extensions and further points of inquiry.
I also want to qualify the sort of inferences I think we can reasonably draw from the presence or absence of intuition. Intuition is fundamentally based on perception. Experiences are collected and generalized, the generalizations are organized and themselves generalized, structural similarities between occurrences are identified on many levels. I do not attempt to explain what intuition is, only to describe certain relevant processes. I think it is evident enough, however, that intuition is limited by perception: that which we cannot perceive or draw generalizations about from other perceptions, we cannot intuit; that which we mis-perceive we are likely to have incorrect intuitions about. Intuition that a concept is a certain way does not entail that the concept actually is that way. Rather, it gives us reason to prefer to believe ways in which that concept could be that effectively explain the intuition in question. Colloquially, that a phenomenon “looks like” something is not reason to believe that the phenomenon actually is that something; it is reason to believe in whatever something makes the phenomenon most likely to look like whatever we perceive it to be. Thus, two hypotheses that make the intuitions we have equally likely are equivalent in truth value with respect to intuition. All I must show to demonstrate that predicate-causation is equivalent with regards to intuition to correlation-causation or counterfactual-causation, is that predicate-causation is equivalently capable of explaining our intuitions, not that it necessarily equivalently resembles them.
As Lewis does, I will simplify the problem. I presume that the world/universe is deterministic in the forward direction of time: given the state at some time and the laws of nature, the state at all future times is uniquely determined. I think that predicate-causation can be adjusted to cope with probabilistic causation or laws of nature, but my initial formulation will presume that both are deterministic. I presume that all interactions are law-governed and laws of nature exist in some form as to entail their instantiation: given conditions conforming to the predicate of a law, the law and conditions together entail the law’s consequent. Like Lewis, I only attempt to define what it means for something to be a cause as opposed to the cause, although I think the formulation of predicate-causation renders that concern to some extent irrelevant.
	I also completely bracket issues of world-constitution (“what there is”). I presume that time exists and is both discrete and uniform: all points in time are distinct, only one ordering (the actual one) exists, and one can capture the state of the entire world at any of these points. I presume that world-state is somehow representable so that one can formulate predicates over world-states that take in a world state and return true or false (for example, if the state of the world is representable as a list of particles and their positions, a predicate over world-states might return true if the first particle in the list was in a certain position and false if it wasn’t). I presume that the laws of nature describe a transition function between world-states at subsequent timesteps: given state w0 at time t0, the laws of nature uniquely determine the state w1 at time t1, the timestep directly following t0(for example, if world-state is again a list of particles and their positions, the laws of nature in an inert universe would be the identity function: they would merely return the particle list they were given).
In the aim of illustrating my arguments as clearly as possible, I will construct a simple example. An example world W consists of three particles, particle one, particle two, and particle three, henceforth referred to as p1, p2, and p3, each with three possible states (what these states are is irrelevant; all that matters is that they are distinct and that there are three of them), state a, state b, and state c, which I will refer to as sa, sb, and sc. The state of this world is thus representable as a string of three characters representing the states of each of the three particles: for example, state "ABC" means that p1 has state sa, p2 has state sb, and p3 has state sc. The laws of nature in this example world are then representable as a transition function between these strings of characters, which I will refer to as L. In an inert world, these laws are the identity function: L("AAA") = "AAA", L("AAB") = "AAB", etcetera. The laws of nature are complete and deterministic: the domain of L is all possible world-states and it always returns the same output state given the same input state. Given L, this example world has a determined state at each timestep starting with initial conditions at t0. Subsequent timesteps are referenced by the positive integers: t1, t2, t923, etc. World states at these timesteps are termed w0 (initial conditions), w1, w2, w923 likewise; per our definitions, i . Wi+1=L(Wi) — in an inert world starting at "AAA", w1 =L(w0)=L("AAA")="AAA". The definition of the transition function / laws of nature L (which string output results from a certain string input) I will leave variable, but it will always take this form.
	I now define predicate-causation. Under predicate-causation, “causation” is a relation between two relata, the first the cause and the second the effect. Both relata are predicates ranging over world states; each defines a deterministic function with domain the set of all possible world states and range (true, false). Causal statements reduce as following:

The causal statement “A caused B” reduces to the truth of three statements:

w. A w at tiB w at tj(proposition I)
w. A w at tiB w at tj(proposition II)
A wi

	and given (1) and (3) logically necessitates

B wj

	where

A and B are predicates over world states
w is any world state
i is the time of the cause
j is the time of the effect
is the logical negation operator
is the logical arrow

Per this definition, the laws of nature entail the truthhood of all hypothetical causal statements (given the laws, we know if “A causes B” or not) and the laws of nature along with the initial conditions entail the truthhood of all actual causal statements (given the laws and initial conditions, we know if “A caused B” or not). Given the laws of nature as a transition function between world states from one timestep to the next, one can deduce whether or not a state fulfilling a certain predicate A (the cause) at some time i entails a state fulfilling another predicate B (the effect) at another time j (note that jis not necessary after i; I address this later). Thus causation in both possible and actual worlds reduces to laws of nature plus initial conditions.
Putting this in the language of our example, let the laws of nature modify the states of the three particles as following:

p1 is cycled: it transitions from sa to sb, sb to sc, and  sc back to  sa.
p2 decays to  sc gradually: it transitions from sa to  sb,  sb to sc, and sc to sc.
p3 decays to  sc immediately: it transitions from sa to  sb,  sb to sc, and  sb to sc.


The function L simply expresses these transitions: L("AAA") = "BBC", L("ABC") = "BCC", etc. (note that the effects on the particles need not be independent; they just happen to be in this case). Let the initial state of the universe be "AAA": p1, p2, and p3 are all in state sa.

We can then express and determine the truth value of causal statements:

p1 being in state sa at timestamp t0 caused p1 to be in state sb at timestamp t1
True; p1 progresses from sa to sb, it cannot progress to sb from any other state than sa, and it was actually in sa at t0.
p1 being in state sa at timestamp t1 caused p1 to be in state sb at timestamp t2
False; p1 was not actually in sa at t1.
p3 being in state sa at timestamp t0 caused p3 to be in state sc at timestamp t1
False; p3 could have been in any of the three states at t0 and would still have been in sc at t1.
p2 being in state sbOR sc at timestamp t1 caused p3 to be in state sc at timestamp t2
True; p2 progresses from both sb to scand sc to sc, it cannot progress to sc from sa, and it was actually in sb or sc at t1.

Note that these are all expressed in the form of predicates, so “p2 being in state sb or sc” is a perfectly valid cause; it describes a predicate that returns true for worlds in which p2 is in state sb or p2 is in sc and false otherwise.

	I grant that this formulation of causation may seem rather arcane. What are these predicates, and what do they have to do with the colloquial causal-speak which usually invokes descriptions of particular events? I argue that when we speak of loosely defined events we are actually speaking of predicates. Consider a ball breaking a window. The event“the ball hitting the window” can be reformulated into the predicate “worlds in which a small roughly spherical mass impacted a thin rectangular pane of glass”. The event “the window breaking” can be formulated into the predicate “worlds in which the small rectangular pane of glass is shattered into many pieces”. The cause predicate is the disjunction of all possible ways in which the ball could have hit the window (while still being considered a ball hitting a window) and the event predicate is the disjunction of all possible ways in which the window could have broken (while still being considered a window breaking).
	This formulation hews quite closely to the kinds of statements we make, more so than either correlation-causation or counterfactual-causation. Like counterfactual-causation, the English translates naturally: proposition I becomes “if event A happened, event B would happen” and proposition II translates to “if event A hadn’t happened, event B wouldn’t have”. Certain linguistic formulations almost imply predicates directly: “regardless of the way the ball impacted the window, the window still would have broken” (the general cause and general effect). Moreover, under predicate-causation, it is true both that the specific way in which the ball impacted the window caused the window to be broken in the specific way in which it was broken and that the fact that the flying ball, in virtue of being a flying ball — round, massive, and moving with high velocity — caused the window to break — shatter into variously sized pieces. It is not true, however, that the fact that the flying ball merely in virtue of being a flying ball caused the window to break in any one particular way or that the specific way in which the flying ball impacted the window caused the window to be broken in the general sense. All of these classifications match our intuition.
	A likely initial concern with a formulation of causation in terms of predicates instead of events is that causal predicates will permit arbitrary and-inclusion and effect predicates will permit arbitrary or-inclusion: if predicate-A caused predicate-B, wouldn’t predicate-A-and-C also cause predicate-B, or if predicate-D caused predicate-E, wouldn’t predicate-D also cause predicate-E or predicate-F? Logical analysis of the definition, however, shows that this is not the case. For predicate-A-and-C to cause predicate-B, not-predicate-A-and-C must entail not-predicate-B, i.e. not-predicate-A-or-not-predicate-C must entail not-predicate-B, which is not the case. Likewise, for predicate-D to cause predicate-E-or-predicate-F, not-predicate-D must entail not-predicate-E-or-predicate-F, i.e. not-predicate-E-and-not-predicate-F, which is also not the case. Predicate-causation as postulated specifies exactly that causes are sufficient (proposition I) and necessary (proposition II) for their effects.
Predicate-causation addresses the problems facing both correlation-causation and counterfactual-causation. The problem of effects and the problem of epiphenomena are resolved similarly to how Lewis resolves them. Proposition 1 holding between a cause and an effect does not entail that it holds between the effect and the cause. A fire-existence predicate (cause) entails a smoke-existence predicate (effect) through transitions between world states determined by the laws of nature, and not-fire-existence entails not-smoke-existence likewise, but smoke-existence doesn’t entail fire existence, nor does not-smoke-existence entail not-fire-existence. Likewise, a cold-existence predicate (cause) entails both a cough-existence predicate (effect) and a sneeze-existence predicate (effect) through some law-governed progression of world states, but cough-existence does not entail sneeze-existence nor vice versa.
More fundamentally with regards to those two classes of cases, predicate-causation expresses something quite different from correlation. The existence of a predicate-causal relation depends on a chain of law-governed deterministic progressions between world states from cause to effect. For cause and effect to be causally related, the cause predicate must restrict possible world states to those guaranteed by the laws of nature to transition through some series of steps to the effect predicate. The ball breaks the window through a series of low-level interactions: the first section hits the window, a slight crack opens, the next section hits, the crack widens, etcetera. Two events merely co-occurring has nothing to do with it.
Predicate-causation generates an intriguing result for preemption cases. Consider event A, which “would have caused” event C, but was preempted by event B. Predicate-causation classifies the simple relations identically to counterfactual-causation. Neither event A (A-happening-predicate) nor event B (B-happening-predicate) counts as a cause of event C (C-happening-predicate) because proposition II does not hold in either case. Working with predicates over world-states instead of events, however, allows us to say something else about this situation: A-happening-or-B-happening is a cause of C-happening. Proposition I holds per definition: if either A happens or B happens, C will happen. The negation of the A-happening-or-B-happening predicate is A-not-happening-and-B-not-happening, in which case C will not happen (presuming C is not preempted by any additional events); thus proposition II holds, so A-or-B is a cause of C.
Although this may seem counterintuitive at the macroscopic level of complex events (balls hitting windows), I think it makes more sense at the fundamental level. Consider a hypothetical world of three potential particles: A, B, and C, where both particles A and B cause particle C: the laws of nature of this hypothetical world make it such that the existence of an A-particle at timestep t entails the existence of a C-particle at timestep t+1 and such that the existence of a B-particle at timestep t likewise entails the existence of a C-particle at timestep t+1. Say that in this world both an A-particle and a B-particle exist at timestep t_0. At timestep t_1, particle C will exist. In this simple context, particle-A-or-particle-B seems like a more reasonable cause: rephrased in English, “the laws of nature make it such so that if A exist or B exists C will exist in the next timestep”. That is equivalent to the causal statement that A-existence-or-B-existence causes C-existence. If we wish to reduce causation in the first place, we must deny that two world-states can differ only in which causal relations obtained — the “obtainment of a causal relation” is merely the truth value of a statement supervening on the laws of nature and initial conditions.
Causation-by-omission is rendered semantically trivial. Unlike events, predicates have no problem with negation. The predicate-causal relation can obtain between a plants-not-being-watered proposition and a plants-dying proposition without issue. The plants-not-being-watered proposition is indeed the union of everyone who failed to water the plants (in predicate form); it selects only worlds in which Billy failed to water the plants, the Queen of England failed to water the plants, Barack Obama failed to water the plants, etcetera. Predicate-causation correctly selects out the singular cases of omission which we intuitively likewise reject: Barack Obama failing to water the plants does not entail that the plants die for the Barack-Obama-failing-to-water-the-plants predicate does not reject worlds in which someone else did in fact water the plants. Billy’s failure to water the plants is likewise rejected by predicate-causation, but I think this can be classified as just a linguistic omission: consider the more verbose “The plants died because Billy failed to water them and no one else did”. The latter part of that sentence is equivalent to “no one watered the plants”, which is indeed identified as a cause of the plants’ death.
More importantly, I think, predicate-causation offers an explanation for why causation-by-omission “works”. Under predicate-causation, for no one watering the plants to cause the plants to die is the same as for someone watering the plants to cause the plants to live except in that no one happened to water the plants. “Watering causing the plants to live” turns into the plants-are-watered predicate entailing the plants-live predicate through a series of law-governed transitions (proposition I) and the plants-are-not-watered predicate entailing the plants-die predicate, again through a series of law-governed transitions (proposition II). “Not-watering causes the plants to die” turns into the plants-are-not-watered predicate entailing the plants-die predicate through a series of law-governed transitions (proposition I) and the not-plants-are-not-watered-predicate, i.e. the plants-are-watered-predicate, entailing the plants-do-not-die, i.e. plants-live predicate — but this is identical; the two propositions are just swapped! This coincides quite suggestively with common phrasing; we might well say “The plants were killed by no one watering them!”, but we might also say “If someone had only watered the plants, they would have lived!”, and I think we consider the two statements to be referring to the same causal relationship.
Predicate-causation is not without its points of concern. An intriguing corollary of this theory is that the causal relation can and does in fact obtain in the reverse direction of time. Given the laws of nature and a certain world-state, it is possible that only one previous world-state could have resulted in the current state, meaning that the existence of the second world-state is both sufficient and necessary for the existence of the first and predicate-causation will label it a cause. It does however seem that effects have far more potential causes than causes have “potential” effects. I think this is merely a consequence of our particular laws of nature. For example, in a world where nothing happens (the laws of nature are the identity function), knowledge of world-state at any point in time provides knowledge of world-state at all points in time. In a world where nothing changes, choosing a preferred direction would be nonsensical, and indeed predicate-causation does not: the existence of an object at any particular time entails its existence at all times. However, our intuitions about this kind of situation are weak, and substantial further ground remains to be explored.
As a final aside, I think predicate-causation also gives us a reasonable way to characterize general causal statements of the form “A causes B”. Presuming additionally that the laws of nature are invariant across time (not required for the formulation henceforth), one can reduce such statements to w . i . A wi B wi+n, with terms as defined earlier. In English, “A causes B if A is sufficient through law-governed interactions at any point in time to necessitate B at some later point”. Note the omission of an analogue to proposition II: I think general causal statements are usually used to indicate that the cause involved is merely sufficient for the effect, not necessarily (although perhaps usually) necessary. “Flying balls break windows” is not rendered false by a ball flying through a window that was already broken; when we make such a statement, we just mean that a flying ball will break a window if a window is there to be broken. Such statements are difficult to pin down or intuit, and I will not further pursue this line of inquiry, but I think predicate-causation provides more of a potential path to examine them than either of its competitors.
I admit I am not yet entirely convinced by my own theory. Predicate-causation changes the relata of the causal relation to something nowhere near as prima facie intuitive as events and results in many interesting conclusions, some of which I’ve discussed but others of which I have yet to even contemplate. The theory does, however, resolve several challenges faced by counterfactual-causation in novel ways that seem to convincingly coincide with both intuition and language. I additionally think that providing a simplified mathematical model of the world and laws of nature is an extraordinarily helpful technique in reasoning about causation: as opposed to constructing theories that explain complicated cases, we can instead explain the simple cases and explain how the complicated cases reduce to combinations of simple ones. Much work remains, but I think the rough idea of predicate-causation as I have tried to establish has proven itself compelling enough to merit serious consideration and further analysis.
